hello everybody this is a talk all about
white dwarf stars but first let's look
at an ordinary star the ordinary stars
what we call in the main sequence stars
are those that carry out the conversion
by nuclear fusion of hydrogen to helium
in their cores when they make that
fusion happen due to the pressure in the
temperature in the center it releases
energy and that resists the pull of
gravity inwards and so they act like
giant pressure cookers sitting in
balance usually for very long periods of
time with the force of gravity pushing
inwards and the heat and pressure trying
to get out resisting that keeping them
more or less in balance that nuclear
fusion process is relatively easy to
understand in the pressure cooker like
conditions in the middle of stars the
gas has all been stripped of its
electrons and so you just have electrons
and the nuclei of the atoms all whizzing
around in what's called a plasma and the
nuclei of hydrogen are just these little
red particles that we've drawn on the
diagram here protons positively charged
now normally two protons both being
positively charged would repel each
other and not get close enough to stick
together but due to the high pressure
and temperature inside the core of a
star they can get rammed together and
two of them will combine give out a
flash of energy a gamma ray and a little
gray particle there the positron carries
away one of the positive charges that
leaves
with a proton and a neutron one of the
protons has been converted to a neutron
in the process and that's the nucleus
now of heavy hydrogen or deuterium they
also call it deuterium you can repeat
the step take deuterium and add another
proton to it get some more energy
released and make a three particle
nucleus of helium-3 and if you do that
twice you can smash the to helium threes
together and create a helium four
nucleus at the bottom there with four
particles two protons and two neutrons
and you get two protons back out so if
you do the accounting you have put six
protons in and get two out so four are
consumed and you end up with 1/4
particle of helium at the bottom there
that's going on right in the center of
the cores of stars now if your star is
quite small up to about 1/2 the mass of
the Sun then the course it's there doing
fusion and because of the heat rising
out away from it all of the material of
the star gradually gets churned through
the core they very effectively mix and
it will manage to convert almost all of
its hydrogen into helium during its very
long lifetime eventually it'll be a ball
of helium and then it's stuck it can't
release any more energy and so they
shrink down gravity wins the battle and
you end up with
a helium white dwarf star first as like
the Sun is an intermediate step as they
begin to run out of fuel in the middle
they undergo a bit of a reorganization
and swell up into a red giant star a
much larger size and the inner core
shrinks right down it's got all the
helium in it the inert helium that's of
no use for the fusion process and
surrounding that you're going to shell
of hydrogen and that is triggered into
carrying out fusion in this outer shell
essentially it burns its way out through
the star consuming a lot more of the
hydrogen but the outward pressure of
that burning hydrogen shell is what
drives the rest of the star to swell-up
and become a red giant
now if the star is even larger in the
range 1 to 8 times the mass of the Sun
then you can go through the next stage
and the helium can get hot enough in
that central core but around a hundred
million degrees for helium to combine
and form carbon and then for carbon and
helium to combine to make oxygen so you
get two new elements building up in the
core C and O
a massive us eight to ten and a half
times the mass of the Sun can even start
to convert the carbon on into other
elements like neon sodium and magnesium
they building them up into the center
but each stage in this ladder of fusion
requires higher pressures and higher
temperatures more massive stars
therefore to trigger it's and it's II
often less efficient than the step
before releasing less energy so each
stage doesn't last as long the red
giants have swelled up they tend to lose
their grip on the gravity on their outer
layers and so they tend to lose quite a
lot of mass getting thrown off out away
from the star and that shrinkage of mass
reduces their own gravity and so
eventually the the star can't carry on
doing nuclear fusion anymore and what
happens is as yet blown away as what's
called a planetary nebula and you expose
the nuclear core in the center and
that's the white dwarf star shown
glowing right in the center of that
marvelous picture there
white stars were first discovered when
Friedrich Bessel was looking at how the
star Sirius was moving across the sky
and he noticed that it was wobbling
backwards and forwards with a period of
about 50 years you can see that in the
graph there it's doing this rather
curious to-and-fro movement as it
traversed across our line of sight and
what he reasoned was that it must have
an unseen companion that was pulling on
it and in fact they would be orbiting
their common center of mass but we
couldn't see that companion and that was
rather curious because it would need to
be quite large and quite massive to move
a star like Sirius around 1862 a few
years later the manufacturers Alvin
Clarke makers of very fine telescopes
were building what was then the largest
refracting telescope in the world the
eighteen and a half inch at Dearborn in
Chicago and they used that star Sirius
as a test target and they noted that it
did indeed have a dim star close to it
magnitude eight point four is about ten
thousand times fainter than the main
star which explained really why we
weren't able to see it before we now
call that star Sirius B or the pup for
Sirius is the dog star to do indeed
orbit each other around their common
center of mass every fifty point one
years much as vessel had figured out and
we've got a plot of their movement on
the right hand side their Mako orbit
round that point right in the center
because we can see both of them and
track the orbits where you can use
Newton's laws of gravity and Kepler's
laws of planetary orbits to work out the
solar mass equivalent of each of them
and it turns out that the main star is
2.1 times the solar mass the faint
companion is just under one
quite interesting that star of mass 98%
of the mass of the Sun should be 500
times less bright but have a temperature
much hotter at 25,000 degrees and be
giving off x-rays and there's a picture
on the right there of the x-ray image of
Sirius the main star with its little
companion giving off x-rays as well and
the term white dwarf star was coined for
these after they were discovered and
what they are are the collapsed cause of
these moderate mess stars when they've
reached the end of their life they've
gone through that red giant phase and
they are about the size of the earth but
the mass of the Sun approximately and
one ton of a white dwarf star would only
occupy same size as a sugar cube a cubic
centimeter incredibly dense there are a
million times more dense than the matter
of the earth and so here we have a
diagram that shows the life cycle of a
star like the Sun well used here the
birth of the star in a nebula that
collapses under gravity the star forms
in the center it goes through the main
sequence all the way along through its
life fill I guess you're about nine
billion years old in the case of the Sun
when it starts to swell up it is the
fuel in the core running out and the
reorganization of that helium core with
the hydrogen burning shell and becomes a
full advance of soften formed warf
you can also visualize that on the
Russell diagram this diagram at the
bottom here which shows all different
types of stars laid out according to
temperature and brightness a little low
and here the Sun in the middle as a
hello dwarf the boost are the hot ones
that are really massive up here when the
Sun runs out of fuel it moves over its
weight becoming cooler and becomes a sub
joint burning that hydrogen gel over a
helium core and red giant sand color
suddenly then changes back to hello here
when it starts burning helium in the
middle of the core and then it turns
into a dual shell burning star with an
helium shell and a hydrogen shell over
an either/or and the whole thing is if
it goes off the outer layers the
planetary nebula leaves off behind which
so it's a simple process and the same
sort of track as from mr. least us they
will leave the main sequence they spend
across the middle here turn right and go
through one or more of the giant star
phases before coming down to being a
white dwarf up to a certain limit so
about solar masses these are typical
looking planetary nebulae they've all
got the white dwarf star sat in the
middle there and you can see the outflow
of gas from them is often thrown off
along the spin axis of the star and our
view of it depends whether we're looking
down the axis here we're looking at
least a nebula over here we're looking
very much from the side yeah in this
case here we're looking side on that
angle so you can see what's going on
I said the different masses of the stars
in the first place makes a difference to
the outcome and between zero and ten and
a half solar masses you can get
different types of white dwarfs out the
very smallest stars just burn hydrogen
to helium and form a helium a white
dwarf on the right hand side they're
yellow stars like the Sun go through and
produce helium and then go on to produce
carbon and oxygen and so you get a
carbon oxygen white dwarf and these are
by far the most common
and the reason for that is that the
process to create the helium white
dwarfs in the top two cases in the
smallest and the second smallest classes
of stars takes so long that it probably
hasn't happened in the age of the
universe yet but eventually those will
be the dominant type because there are
far more small stars than big ones and
then the biggest stars in this category
they eight to ten and a half solar mass
stars go on and fuse beyond carbon and
oxygen to make neon and magnesium and
other light metals in the core and
produce these rather rare oxygen neon
magnesium those look a slightly 8 D
later so what's going on inside all of
these white dwarfs is that you want to
see an electrons that have been stripped
away from their parent at a nuclei in
the atoms have been torn apart by the
heat and the temperature and they're
probably at a temperature of 10 million
degrees right throughout the the body of
the star
they have an outer layer surrounding
that as the that's against the cold of
outer space of course and so the outside
temperature can be 150 thousand degrees
down to perhaps four thousand degrees in
the case of some of the the oldest and
smallest mass ones
for their surface gravity are having
this amount of mass compressed into such
as it creates a shift in the spectrum
the light has to climb a hill to get
away from these stars get away from
their intense gravity and that shifts
the spectral lines creates a
gravitational redshift you can see that
in the spectrum at the bottom and that
allows us to weigh the Stars work at how
much mass they are even if they're on
their own and don't have a companion so
that's another good way of figuring that
out the collapse to nothing if the
gravity is pulling in so strongly yet
there's no source of energy to resist it
and no nuclear fusion going on what's
stopping them from collapsing well
electrons in boxes this is a little bit
of quantum mechanics electrons are very
antisocial beasts and they don't like to
have more than one of them put in any
quantum size box so if you imagine the
star to have lots and lots of boxes
occupying its volume and the ones across
the bottom are the lowest energy boxes
and then the energy increases as you go
further up the screen the electrons can
sit there all in the noise bottom lowest
energy state as I've drawn it to begin
with but if you squeeze the box you're
okay to start with because you can get
rid of a couple of empty boxes there but
if you keep on squeezing a star then
it's reducing its volume enough you
start forcing electrons to have to climb
the energy ladder so the pressure of
gravity is pushing inwards but it's
forcing those electrons into higher and
higher energy states and they don't like
that costs energy you have to do work to
to achieve it and so the result is a
resistance force that is really the
electrons wanting to get back to the
lower energy state but not being allowed
to do so and so that Raziel
gravity and it's that electron pressure
that holds the star from collapsing this
was all figured out by Chandrasekhar he
did the mathematics to work out that the
electron pressure was able to resist
gravity up to a limit at one point for
four times the mass of our Sun gradually
as you increase the mass of a white
dwarf gravity forces those electrons
higher and higher into a smaller and
smaller volume but higher in higher
energy states and so the white dwarfs
get smaller and smaller and eventually
the pressure and the temperature in the
middle triggers off a thermonuclear
explosion the carbon in the middle of
these carbon oxygen white dwarf
detonates they all at once in a huge
explosion and tears the star apart and
so you can see in that diagram on the
right there what happens is if the white
dwarf star forms and is then able to
pull material from an expanded companion
that's in the red giant phase then it
can become overwhelmed make shrinks it
pulls in more material it shrinks a bit
more eventually reaching that critical
pressure and temperature to cause the
carbon to start fusing into heavier
elements in the center and that's a
runaway process because it releases
energy blows the whole star apart and so
because most stars are born in binary
systems our Sun is an exception beings
on its own it's really quite common for
one of the stars to reach the end stage
and form a white dwarf and then the
other one to catch up and form a red
giant and so these binary systems going
on to form these type 1a supernovae are
really quite common here's one blowing
up in a distant galaxy it's the bright
object at the bottom left there and you
can compare its brightness to the whole
of the center of the host galaxy that it
was part of
very very powerful output of light
indeed for the duration of the explosion
and because they all explode when they
reach this same mass a Chandrasekhar
limit they all detonate with the same
power output means we can use them as
standard candles the idea is that a
candle of equivalent brightness will
look brighter if it's nearby and
proportionately fainter according to the
inverse square law as its further and
further away from you and so if you know
the power output of the candle and you
look to see how bright it appears to be
you can work backwards to the distance
and that means we can use these type 1a
supernovae that explode all with the
same power as distance markers if you
look at how they explode they all have
this characteristic light curve from the
initial explosion they brighten and then
fade and then there's a little kink as
the light changes as it fades down and
different radioactive elements decay at
different rates giving this very
characteristic shape and you can
standardize them for distance and plot
them all on top of each other
as shown on the right there and do you
see they all fit the same idea now this
was used famously
a Nobel Prize for this one with solar
using it to compare the distance
established by white dwarfs and type 1a
supernovae against the other measure of
how far away things are which is the the
redshift caused by the expansion of the
universe and by looking at the two and
comparing the different distant
estimates for distant galaxies he was
able to figure out that the universe is
expanding not at a constant rate but
getting faster and faster and therefore
there must be something pushing the
universe apart and that's
something is given the name dark energy
we have since then found one or two
examples of type 1a supernovae that
appear to have been exploding with
disproportionately large masses and
perhaps this one here SN 2009 DC is a
good example it's shown with the big red
sorry big black circle on their left
hand diagram which puts it rather away
from where the standard light curves are
and we think that somehow it had was
rather an unusual layer white dwarf
explosion where seem to have got a a
nickel-iron core so it may have been
just an oddball well the latest research
is that the classical accretion binary
model of a type 1a supernova and may not
be entire the whole entire story when
they have that accretion disk feeding
off the material of the expanded red
giant they should emit considerable
amounts of x-rays and studies of
elliptical galaxies shows that there
just aren't enough x-rays coming from
those galaxies to account for more than
about 5% of the type 1a supernovae so
this says that there must be another
mechanism at play producing those type
1a explosions and around 95% of all of
the supernovae are not from this
accretion model they could be from the
collision of two
co-orbiting white dwarfs and maybe this
all means that we need to relook at
their use of standard candles and
perhaps this is going to change our
ideas about the business to do with dark
energy because if that results turns out
to be based on an assumption that
they're all from the Chandrasekhar
limits and yet many of them are not they
might result in result from two white
dwarfs colliding for example and that
could be quite a problem so watch this
space well thank you very much do click
on the subscribe link if you want to be
informed about new videos that are
coming from my collection and I'll see
you all later